Overview:
The expansion of the research community's ability to collect and store data has grown much more rapidly
than its ability to catalog, make accessible, and make use of data. Major challenges facing the scientific
research enterprise are the basic problems of making data discoverable, accessible, and re-usable at
Internet scales; and making it possible to use data to replicate analyses done in published research. The
importance of this issue is at the center of many recent initiatives in Open Science and Open Data. The
objective of this project is to address these deficiencies and to enable more options for data
interoperability and reusability in the current research data landscape. To do this requires integrating a set
of preexisting and newly designed software solutions into the previously funded Robust Persistent
Identification of Data (RPID) testbed. These additional software components will provide a complete
fabric of data services built on the concept of managing data objects by assigning individual identifiers
(much like devices are individually identified on today?s internet) and the core principles of making data
FAIR (findable, accessible, interoperable, and reusable). The additional software components along with
educational materials produced by this proposal will lower the barrier for adoption of Persistent
Identification (PID) centric data management throughout the data lifecycle, from initial data collection to
long-term use and reuse. The fabric of data services created within the Enhanced-RPID (E-RPID) testbed
has potential to change the way experiments interact with data and to stimulate tool development that will
increases the value of data by easing the technical hurdles for interoperability and reuse.

Intellectual Merit:
The proposed project will create a realization of both the PID-Centric data management (referred to as the
Digital Object Architecture or DOA) and the FAIR data principles, creating a full, end-to-end reference
implementation that demonstrates how such projects should be designed, implemented, and operated and
also how to make such systems attractive to and usable by a broad range of scientific clients. Such
systems increase the publication, discovery, and reuse of data, thus contributing to the greater integrity of
the scientific enterprise. This reference implementation will be based on a combination of third party
software, prior work by the proposal team as part of the predecessor RPID project, and new work. The
resulting E-RPID testbed will contribute to knowledge across the fields of computer science and
cyberinfrastructure. This work will be performed in the context of the Research Data Alliance (RDA) to
form reciprocally beneficial implementation feedback loops. The work proposed here will finally realize
concepts that are years or even decades old. A full implementation of the DOA, embodying the FAIR
principles, focusing on researchers could potentially transform the way many scientific disciplines
conduct their research. There is a particular opportunity to transform the reusability of data collected with
federal funding and transform the ease with which analyses of experimental or simulation data can be
replicated and extended.

Broader Impacts:
There have been tremendous advances in research in many diverse fields made possible by
implementation of pieces of the DOA and FAIR-based systems for data accessibility and reuse. A full
implementation of the concepts underlying PID-Centric data management could truly revolutionize interand
multi-disciplinary research, particularly in areas where use and reuse of similar data sets over time
are important. This could lead to new research in and societal benefits from many fields, particularly
biology and its many related sub-fields, earth science, and astronomy. E-RPID also has the potential to
trigger new work on data analysis tools along with services that allow easy overlay DOA and FAIR-based
systems on existing repository structures. The work proposed could also lead to significant new service
possibilities for the national (open) research community. The proposed research and development will
also have an impact on Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) training and
education. The educational materials created will make it straightforward for educators to adopt or adapt
the proposed technologies and education materials.
